Add information for Rust, Option and prost (#63)
streamingfast/substreams: docs/developer-guide/creating-protobuf-schemas.md

{% code title="src/pb/mod.rs" %}

```rust
#[path = "eth.erc721.v1.rs"]
#[allow(dead_code)]
pub mod erc721;
```

{% endcode %}

View this file in the repo by visiting the following link.

[https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs)

### Protobuf & Rust Optional Fields

Each field in a Protocol Buffer message are optional by default. Each field in a Protocol Buffer message needs a default value, this indicates that the field has not been populated with any data.

For each field that are reference to other Protocol Buffer message types, Prost generates Rust code that uses the `Option` enum. The `Option` enum is used to represent the absence of a value in Rust. It allows developers to distinguish between a field that has a value and a field that has not been set. The standard approach to represent nullable data when using Rust is through wrapping optional values in `Option<T>`.

Additional information is available for `prost` in its [official GitHub repository](https://github.com/tokio-rs/prost).

> Learn more about Rust Option[Rust Option](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/std/option.html) in the offical documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn more about [Rust Option](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/std/option.html) in the official documentation.
```

{% endhint %}

{% code overflow="wrap" %}

```bash
substreams protogen ./substreams.yaml --exclude-paths="sf/ethereum,sf/substreams,google"
```

{% endcode %}

The Rust code is generated and saved into [`src/pb/eth.erc721.v1.rs`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/eth.erc721.v1.rs)``

The [`mod.rs`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs) file located in the `src/pb` directory of the Substreams Template example is responsible for exporting the freshly generated Rust code.

{% code title="src/pb/mod.rs" %}

```rust
#[path = "eth.erc721.v1.rs"]
#[allow(dead_code)]
pub mod erc721;
```

{% endcode %}

View this file in the repo by visiting the following link.

[https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs)

### Protobuf & Rust Optional Fields

Each field in a Protocol Buffer message are optional by default. Each field in a Protocol Buffer message needs a default value, this indicates that the field has not been populated with any data.

> For each field that are reference to other Protocol Buffer message types, Prost generates Rust code that uses the `Option` enum . The `Option` enum is used to represent the absence of a value in Rust. It allows developers to distinguish between a field that has a value and a field that has not been set. The standard approach to represent nullable data when using Rust is through wrapping optional values in `Option<T>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each field that are reference to other Protocol Buffer message types, Prost generates Rust code that uses the `Option` enum. The `Option` enum is used to represent the absence of a value in Rust. It allows developers to distinguish between a field that has a value and a field that has not been set. The standard approach to represent nullable data when using Rust is through wrapping optional values in `Option<T>`.
```

{% endhint %}

{% code overflow="wrap" %}

```bash
substreams protogen ./substreams.yaml --exclude-paths="sf/ethereum,sf/substreams,google"
```

{% endcode %}

The Rust code is generated and saved into [`src/pb/eth.erc721.v1.rs`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/eth.erc721.v1.rs)``

The [`mod.rs`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs) file located in the `src/pb` directory of the Substreams Template example is responsible for exporting the freshly generated Rust code.

{% code title="src/pb/mod.rs" %}

```rust
#[path = "eth.erc721.v1.rs"]
#[allow(dead_code)]
pub mod erc721;
```

{% endcode %}

View this file in the repo by visiting the following link.

[https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs)

### Protobuf & Rust Optional Fields

> Fields in Protocol Buffer messages are optional by default. Each field in a Protocol Buffer message has a default value of `None`, indicating that the field has not been populated with any data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each field in a Protocol Buffer message are optional by default. Each field in a Protocol Buffer message needs a default value, this indicates that the field has not been populated with any data.
```

The `None` part is related to `Rust` generated code, and not `Protocol Buffer`.

> Prost generates Rust code that uses the `Option` type for each field in the Protocol Buffer message. The `Option` type is used to represent the absence of a value in Rust. It allows developers to distinguish between a field that has a value and a field that has not been set. The standard approach to represent nullable data when using Rust is through wrapping optional values in `Option<T>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each field that are reference to other Protocol Buffer message types, Prost generates Rust code that uses the `Option` enum . The `Option` enum is used to represent the absence of a value in Rust. It allows developers to distinguish between a field that has a value and a field that has not been set. The standard approach to represent nullable data when using Rust is through wrapping optional values in `Option<T>`.
```

So the `Option` is only generated for non-native types, native types like `string`, `uint64`, `bytes`, etc. are not wrapped with an `Option`, only fields that are actually nested `message`. I try to come up with a better first sentence, but feel free to improve my suggestion.

I just want the emphasis that it's not all fields that are wrapped.

```proto
message Person {
  string name = 1;
  uint64 age = 2;
  Location location = 3;
}

message Location {
  string city = 1;
  repeated string streets = 2;
}
```

Here, only field ` Location location = 3;` will be wrapped with `Option`.

Author: Ok, that makes sense. Thank you for helping with this!

> 

Reviewer: I would quick info here about usual way to consume the `Option`. I would see a quick description for when you are sure it will never be `None` (in this case use `unwrap()`) and otherwise, use a match statement:

```
match person.Location {
  Some(location) => { // Present, do something }
  None => { // Not present, do something }
}
```

Author: Here is my proposed update. I'll add it to the file if it sounds good to you.
------------------

Protobufs that are messages define fields within them that can be scalar, or simple, values such as a string or integer. Messages can also contain other messages within them. All messages are processed into Option enums by prost when using Rust. Any scalar values in a message will return the value assigned or an empty string or zero, 0, for number types. Messages nested within messages will be processed into Options. For message types that haven't been assigned a value, the default None for Options that are empty will be used.

Reviewer: My comment was about adding a paragraph that explains quickly how to work with `Option` in Rust code. Use `.unwrap` if the dev knows the field is always present, otherwise use:

```
match person.Location { 
    Some(location) => { // Present, do something },
    None => { // Not present, do something }
}
```

Or

```
if let Some(location) = person.location {

}
```

I feel your paragraph is to re-write:

```
For each field that are reference to other Protocol Buffer message types, Prost generates Rust code that uses the `Option` enum. The `Option` enum is used to represent the absence of a value in Rust. It allows developers to distinguish between a field that has a value and a field that has not been set. The standard approach to represent nullable data when using Rust is through wrapping optional values in `Option<T>`
```
?

Author: For each field that references other Protocol Buffer message types, `prost` generates Rust code that uses the `Option` enum. The `Option` enum is used to represent the absence of a value in Rust. It allows developers to distinguish between a field that has a value and a field that has not been set. The standard approach to represent nullable data when using Rust is through wrapping optional values in `Option<T>`

Author: Please let me know on the slightly modified paragraph above.

Reviewer: So the new content is good.

I still want to see a paragraph that gives **quick** instructions on how to deal with `Option` in Rust code, see my previous messages.

Author: Ok. Sounds good.

Author: Here is the verbiage with code snippets inline. If this is acceptable I'll port the content into the MD file, mark it up, commit the file and close the PR. Please let me know when you have a moment. Thank you.
-------------------------------
The Rust match keyword is used to compare the value of an Option with a Some or None variant. The Rust Option enum is used as the return type for functions, or in this case protobuf-based data fields, that may not always return a value. Protobuf fields that are another nested Message type will be returned as the Option enum type. The following code can be used to check for the existence of a value with match, Option, Some, and None.

match person.Location { 
    Some(location) => { // Present, do something },
    None => { // Not present, do something }
}

Scenarios that are known to always contain a value can use the if let statement and bypass the None arm of the match code shown above. The following code example demonstrates using if let for fields that are known to always contain a value.

if let Some(location) = person.location {
   // A value is present. The processing logic would be written here.
}

> Additional information is available for `prost` in its official GitHub repository.
> 
> [https://github.com/tokio-rs/prost](https://github.com/tokio-rs/prost)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional information is available for `prost` in its [official GitHub repository](https://github.com/tokio-rs/prost).
```

Or on `prost` directly

Author: This is more succinct and clear. Thank you for the input.

Learn more about Rust Option in the offical documentation.

[https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/std/option.html](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/std/option.html)

> [https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/)

Reviewer: We seems to have 2 links to similar locations. Also, feels like the link could be emdedded also in the sentence above.

Author: The links are similar, but also provide slightly different information. I'm good with using one or the other. I wanted to present some options. This is a good catch. Thank you for the input.

Reviewer: Pick only one please.

Author: Ok. I'm going to merge these changes and then address adding the code from above and moving one of these links to the sentence.

{% endhint %}

{% code overflow="wrap" %}

```bash
substreams protogen ./substreams.yaml --exclude-paths="sf/ethereum,sf/substreams,google"
```

{% endcode %}

The Rust code is generated and saved into [`src/pb/eth.erc721.v1.rs`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/eth.erc721.v1.rs)``

The [`mod.rs`](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs) file located in the `src/pb` directory of the Substreams Template example is responsible for exporting the freshly generated Rust code.

{% code title="src/pb/mod.rs" %}

```rust
#[path = "eth.erc721.v1.rs"]
#[allow(dead_code)]
pub mod erc721;
```

{% endcode %}

View this file in the repo by visiting the following link.

[https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs](https://github.com/streamingfast/substreams-template/blob/develop/src/pb/mod.rs)

### Protobuf & Rust Optional Fields

Protobufs define fields within them that can be typed as scalar, or simple, values such as a string or integer. Messages can also contain other messages nested within them.

> All messages are processed into `Option` enums by `prost`. Any scalar values in a message will return the value assigned, or an empty string, or zero, 0, for integer types. Messages nested within messages will be processed into an `Option`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any primitive data types in a message will generate the corresponding Rust type (`String` for `string`, `u64` for `uint64`, etc.) and will assign the default value of the this corresponding Rust type if the field is not present in a message (empty string for `String`, 0 for integer types, `false` for `bool`, etc.). For field that references other `message` complex type, Rust will generate the corresponding `message` type wrapped with an `Option` enum type and will use `None` variant if the field is not present in the message.
```

> The `Option` enum is used to represent the absence of a value in Rust. It allows developers to distinguish between a field that has a value and a field that has not been set. The standard approach to represent nullable data when using Rust is through wrapping optional values in `Option<T>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Option` enum is used to represent the presence (`Some(x)`) or absence (`None`) of a value in Rust. It allows developers to distinguish between a field that has a value and a field that has not been set. The standard approach to represent nullable data when using Rust is through wrapping optional values in `Option<T>`.
```

> The Rust match keyword is used to compare the value of an `Option` with a `Some` or `None` variant. The Rust `Option` enum is used as the return type for functions, or in this case protobuf-based data fields, that may not always return a value. The following code can be used to check for the existence of a value with match, `Option`, `Some`, and `None`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Rust `match` keyword can be used to compare the value of an `Option` with a `Some` or `None` variant. Here a code snippet that can be used to deal with a type wrapped in an `Option`:
```

```rust

> match person.Location {
>     Some(location) => { // Present, do something },
>     None => { // Not present, do something }
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
match person.Location {
    Some(location) => { /* Value is present, do something */ }
    None => { /* Value is absent, do something */ }
}
```

```

> Scenarios that are known to always contain a value can use the `if let` statement and bypass the `None` arm of the `match` code shown above. The following code example demonstrates using `if let` for `Option` fields that are known to always contain a value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are only interested in dealing with presence of a value, use the `if let` statement to only have do deal with the `Some(x)` arm of the `match` code shown above:
```

```rust

> if let Some(location) = person.location {
>     // A value is present. The processing logic would be written here.
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if let Some(location) = person.location {
    // Value is present, do something
}
```

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scenarios that are known to always contain a value can use the `.unwrap()` call on the `Option` to obtain the wrapped data. This is true if you control the creation of the messages yourself or if the field is documented as always being present

{% hint style=“info” %}
**Note**: Be 100% sure that the field is always present, otherwise your Substreams will panic and will never complete, being stuck on this block forever.
{% endhint %}
```

> Additional information is available for `prost` in its [official GitHub repository](https://github.com/tokio-rs/prost).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional information is available for `prost`, the tool generating the Rust code from Protobuf definitions, in its [official GitHub repository](https://github.com/tokio-rs/prost).
```
